---
title: U.S. Department of Transportation Announces $120 Million in Funding for the Advanced Transportation Technology and Innovation Program
date: 2023-11-21
---

The U.S. Department of Transportation announced the Tier-3 Fiscal Year (FY) 2023-2024 Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) offering the availability of up to $60 million per FY for the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law’s Advanced Transportation Technologies and Innovative Mobility Deployment (ATTIMD) Grant Program. This NOFO covers two years, FY 2023 and FY 2024. The program is incorporated in section 503(c)(4) of Title 23, United States Code, and is also known as the _Advanced Transportation Technology and Innovation (ATTAIN)_ Program.  The NOFO is published in Grants.gov, [**grants.gov/search-results-detail/351055**](https://grants.gov/search-results-detail/351055), or search using “**693JJ324NF00005”**. The application deadline is February 2, 2024.  A webinar covering details of the program and the NOFO is being scheduled, and we will follow up with the date and time as well as a link to register for the event. This information will be updated in the Grants.gov listing as well.

The ATTAIN Program will provide funding to develop model deployments of large-scale implementation and operation of a diverse set of advanced transportation technologies in various geographic regions. The intent of these deployments is to improve the mobility of people and goods; improve the durability and extend the life of transportation infrastructure; reduce costs and improve return on investments; protect the environment and deliver environmental benefits; measure and improve operational performance; reduce the number and severity of traffic crashes and increase driver, passenger, and pedestrian safety; collect, disseminate, and use real-time transportation-related information; facilitate account-based payments for transportation access and services and integrate payment systems across modes; monitor transportation assets; deliver economic benefits by reducing delays, improving system performance, and providing for the efficient and reliable movement of goods and services; accelerate the deployment of connected/autonomous vehicles technologies; or incentivize travelers to share or shift trips depending on travel demand and system capacity.

These grants will make up no more than 80-percent of the total proposed project costs, with the remainder coming from non-Federal sources. 

If you have any questions, please contact the ATTAIN Program Managers: Jim Garling at [Jim.Garling@dot.gov](mailto:Jim.Garling@dot.gov), 202-366-2155, or Sharon Cuevas at [Sharon.Cuevas@dot.gov](mailto:Sharon.Cuevas@dot.gov), 202-923-0974.

